# my faith

Dear Appa,

I want to start a conversation with you about my faith. To make this conversation more meaningful, I'm resorting to writing down my thoughts which I've arrived at after years of contemplation about my faith.

## How do I define my faith?

Over time, I have found it difficult to imagine the existence of a personified god that is talked about in the Bible. Moreover, any human that is considered god now like Jesus or Buddha; they are to my mind, probably highly enlightened individuals. Thus I can only say, I have no faith or belief and I'm perfectly fine with that.

## But do I believe in a God at all?

The honest answer is I don't know. I have searched by reading philosophy, contemplating it on my own, having discussions with peers - but while some things are convincing, many others are not. First of all, I agree there might be superior forces out there - things I cannot understand or perceive; it is very possible. But I don't think God is a man with a white beard, who has my name written on his palm. I have tried but it is extremely difficult for me to think otherwise. I honestly find it demeaning that people think they have to convince me it is not so. I think I have a right to believe what I want to.

## Do I believe in prayer?

I think a lot of things that religion does for humans, probably have unintentional benefits. The peace of mind one gets meditating in a prayer hall; or visualising one's goal in the hope they will achieve it - all of which can be credited to the unknown and powerful forces that drive our minds.

## What are the practical implications of this?

It has become difficult to do the things I once enjoyed doing - like saying the rosary or attending a mass at church. I understand these were once a very important aspect of my life, but now they seem more like chores that I have to do. I don't know how I can convince you of this but imagine having to go to a Hindu temple every time and attending their prayer service - you are there, physically, but you would rather be elsewhere - doing something that is more meaningful to you.

## Am I not scared of damnation or hell?

By the very fact that I don't believe in a god means I don't believe in hell or the devil. I think when my body dies, I cease to exist. There is no afterlife, no souls or ghosts, nothing. My life ends the moment my physical body gives up, sadly. And I find it coercive that religion scares you into being a Christian. By saying damnation follows all those who forsake God, there is nothing more vicious and despotic. So in my mind, I am not scared of something that does not exist.

## Won't a seminar or prayer by priests help me change my mind?

As I mentioned, I have formed these thoughts over the years. Even when I attended the retreat for the youth in Kerala that you had arranged for, I had similar beliefs. But even after listening to them and personally trying my best to keep an open mind, I could not change my mind about what I believed in. I realise there are other benefits - communal praying, surrendering your pain and pressures to a higher power who will resolve them, peace of mind - but for all of this, I do not need to believe in a personal god. I can do this with/without faith - just through meditation.

## What about my family and relatives; how will I tell them about this?

I don't intend to hurt anyone and I know all of this is difficult to imbibe. I am sure most of them will think I am making a mistake. They will think I am arrogant, irresponsible, over-smart; innumerable adjectives can be used to describe their emotions towards me once they know this. But what alternative do I have? Live my entire life - faking a belief I don't have? To keep praying until I start believing again?

If it was anything apart from religion - would they have forced me to do this? Like what if I didn't share their political beliefs - would they have forced me to watch seminars by RSS ideologues, keep faking my interest in it until I believed it? What is it about religion that makes us think we are right? Just because we are born a Christian, why do we have to remain one?

But more importantly, what gives all of us the authority to force our beliefs on others? How are we convinced that everything we believe in is the Absolute Truth - that Roman Catholics got it right - forget other sects - but no other religion did (Judaism - where Christianity diverged from, Islam - another Abrahamic religion, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Zoroastrianism, etc). Are we then that much ignorant and arrogant to accept the possibility that we are wrong?

In summary, it would be sad if they are hurt and cannot accept me for my beliefs. But I'm not willing to change them just because they refuse to understand and accept it.

---

*Updated addition, November 27, 2024*

Religion has stopped being an integral theme in my life. I am not spiritual and I doubt it has had a detrimental effect on my life.

I still love, because I still believe it to be the most pure emotion I take away from being a Christian. I do not wish to be a closet agnostic. I am not challenging anyone (please do not interpret it as so). But I do wish to write, if only to record the essence of my being in code for my future fascination.

Love,  
Akhil